What aspects of the event do you feel you'd be interested in? *
Marketing - The Marketing Team is responsible for all communication sent out by the The India Pen Show team. It is required to come up with content for marketing, especially social media marketing, and frame an image of The India Pen Show in the city by devising various strategies and programs.
Sponsorship - The Sponsorship Team is responsible for shortlisting & approaching sponsors for the event. Sponsorship also needs to be in direct touch with the sponsors to understand their needs and expectations, and make lasting connections and partnerships.
Registration - The Registration Team is required to curate, edit, and reply to all correspondence that is received by The India Pen Show. This includes accepting and approving registrations, collecting money, and a wide variety of event-day responsibilities.
Engagement - The Engagement Team is required to take care of exhibitors and attendee engagement during the event and also while building towards the event.
Hospitality - The Hospitality Team demands the most hands-on, rigorous task during the entire organising process - handling the Exhibitors. Members of this team need to be relentless at fulfilling every need of the Exhibitor and setting a benchmark that can attract other Exhibitors in the future. The selection for this team will be highly competitive as the members of this team need to be utterly professional, with great conversational skills and be sometimes even required to hide in plain sight. Becoming a part of this team requires serious effort and discipline.
Logistics - The Logistics Team is responsible with setting up travel for the Speakers from various destinations around the country and the world to Mumbai for the event in the most convenient way possible. Other logistical duties are also expected along with helping out the Hospitality Team. Due to the ill connectivity of Mumbai airport
Production - Another major avenue is the production of the video and other media. The Production Team is responsible for creating, editing, and transcribing the final video along with creating aesthetically appealing content for social media. The India Pen Show is looking for a major revamp in this section and any interesting new idea is welcome.
Other:


